Welcome, brothers and sisters.
This is a historic moment.
Our studio has moved and is now
located only minutes from the
New World Headquarters Complex
at Warwick, New York.
And this first program from our
new studio will bring you many
spiritual gems.
First, what obstacles have been
overcome so that common people
can read God's Word?
This exciting documentary,
we will see the courage shown by
William Tindale of England.
What helped two fierce enemies
to become close friends?
The uniting power of the Bible
is evident in this account.
And what can we learn from the
Apostle Paul that will improve
our ministry?
We will find out as we join
this family during their family
worship evening.
This is the January program
of JW Broadcast.
As Jehovah's Witnesses,
we truly love the Bible.
Why?
Because we know it is God's Word.
That's why we love reading it.
We love studying it.
And we love learning about its history.
When we pause for a moment
and reflect on the many efforts
that have been made through
the centuries to hinder
and even stop the distribution
of the Bible,
it becomes obvious
that its author,
Jehovah,
has been personally involved
in preserving
and making known his precious Word.
This is very much in harmony
with the thought
in Isaiah chapter 40 and verse 8.
The green grass dries up.
The blossom withers.
But the Word of our God
endures forever.
With that in mind,
I'm happy to speak with you this month
on a theme that's very close to my heart.
The Word of our God endures forever.
The more we come to appreciate
the value of God's Word,
the more we'll be moved to read it,
and even more important,
to apply it in our lives.
Jehovah gave us an outstanding gift
when he inspired faithful men
to record his precious Word.
It's through the pages of God's Word
that we learn just how much God loves us.
Thus, his Word contains guidance
on how to live.
It outlines his purpose in creating us.
It gives us his precious promises
for life everlasting in peace and happiness.
No wonder the Apostle Paul was inspired to write
at 2 Timothy chapter 3 and verses 16 and 17.
All Scripture is inspired of God
and beneficial for teaching,
for reproving, for setting things straight,
for disciplining in righteousness,
so that the man of God may be fully competent,
completely equipped for every good work.
Of course, Satan the Devil does not want people
to have access to these precious truths
from our Heavenly Father, Jehovah.
It's no surprise that there have been many obstacles
to making the Bible available.
While Satan may not have been directly behind all of these,
he certainly had made use of them.
What are some of these obstacles?
And how have they been overcome?
Let's consider the first obstacle,
language barriers.
The first 39 books of the Bible,
which are often called the Old Testament,
were written primarily in the Hebrew language.
These books were known by Hebrew-speaking servants of Jehovah.
However, as time went on,
particularly after the destruction of Babylon,
many Jews established communities
and other nations of the earth.
Many of these Jews spoke Greek.
They no longer used Hebrew.
That meant that many Jews no longer had access
to the scriptures in a language they could understand.
Consider what had happened.
As Alexander the Great conquered more and more
of the then-known world,
Greek gradually became the common language of commerce
and government throughout his empire.
If the Bible was to be understood by the Jews
and by Jewish proselytes
who were scattered throughout this vast Greek-speaking territory,
it needed to be translated into Greek.
Beginning about the year 250 BCE,
the Hebrew scriptures began to be translated into Greek.
In time, that Greek translation came to be known
as the Septuagint.
It was widely and frequently used
by the Christians in the first century who spoke Greek.
In fact, the writers of the Christian Greek scriptures,
which is often called the New Testament,
frequently quoted directly from that translation.
So that obstacle had been overcome.
But there were many more language obstacles ahead.
As the Roman Empire began to flourish,
Latin replaced Greek as a common language.
Now, it was necessary to translate the Bible into Latin.
Some Latin translations of the Bible books began to appear.
But it was in the year 405 CE
that Jerome completed the definitive Latin translation of the Bible.
It came to be known as the Latin Vulgate.
Jerome's translation would become the standard Bible used by Christendom
for the next nearly 1,000 years.
However, Latin soon became the language of the learned and the elite.
So the common people could no longer understand the Bible's message.
During that long period,
there were sincere men that translated portions of the Bible
into some additional languages.
But these translations were, of course, all made by hand.
Such handwritten copies of the Bible were rare and expensive.
Therefore, access to the Bible in vernacular or common languages was very limited.
But language was not the only obstacle that threatened to prevent the distribution of God's Word.
Consider a second factor.
Direct opposition to Bible translation and distribution from religious leaders.
That opposition started to increase in 1229
when the local church council of Toulouse decreed.
We prohibit also that the laity should be permitted to have the books of the old or the New Testament.
In 1234, the council of Taragona decreed,
no one should possess the books of the old or the New Testament in the vernacular language.
And if anyone possesses them, let him deliver them within eight days
from the promulgation of this decree to the local bishop so that they may be burned.
Thus, during a very long period in history,
there was limited access to the Bible in the languages spoken by common people.
But did that mean that the Word of God would not continue to endure?
Neither language barriers nor opposition from religious leaders could stop God's Word from being made known.
Even in those dark times, there were individuals who loved God's Word
and who worked hard to translate it and to make it available to others.
Consider John Wickliffe and his followers who were called the lawlers.
John Wickliffe and his associates completed the translation of the Bible into English about the year 1382.
They eagerly hand-copied the translation and then traveled from village to village
reading the Bible to the common people.
Despite tremendous opposition from the church,
Wickliffe and his followers made the Bible available to many honest-hearted people in the English language.
After Wickliffe died in 1384, great opposition came to his followers.
Many had land and property confiscated. Others were burned at the stake.
In response to the work of Wickliffe and the lawlers, in 1408, Thomas Airendel, Archbishop of Canterbury declared,
We therefore decree and ordain that no man shall hear after by his own authority
translate any text of the scripture into English or any other tongue upon pain of greater excommunication.
Did such opposition wipe out efforts to translate and make the Bible available?
Absolutely not.
The work of Wickliffe and his associates stimulated interest in the Bible throughout England and even as far as Central Europe.
Religious leaders were not able to silence the Word of God.
In fact, within just a few decades after Wickliffe's death, two factors led to a tremendous increase in the availability of the Bible.
The first, about the year 1454, was the development of printing with movable type.
This invention would in time allow for the printing of large quantities of Bibles in many languages.
The second factor was the compiling and printing of the Hebrew and Greek original language text of the Holy Scriptures.
This allowed many translators to have access to the original language texts so that they then could produce high quality translations in their own languages.
What was the result?
In the 1500s across Europe, fresh translations were made and printed in vernacular or common languages, including German, English, Italian, French, Dutch, Czech.
Danish, Swedish, Spanish, Slovenian, and many others.
However, opposition continued.
Bible translators were frequently hounded by the Inquisition and some translators like William Tindale and John Rogers were even put to death for their work.
Nonetheless, the Word of God continued to endure and be made available to more and more language groups.
By the early 1800s, Bible translation began to speed up.
Bible societies and intrepid translators began to work in many parts of the earth so that the Bible began to appear in languages of Asia, Africa, the Pacific Islands,
as well as in indigenous languages of the Americas.
From 1800 to 1899, some portions of the Bible were translated into some 400 languages and from 1900 to 1950, more than 500 languages were added.
Consider what has been accomplished with the New World Translation.
As of this month, the New World Translation has been produced in whole or in part in 149 languages with an additional 37 languages approved.
It's obvious that neither language barriers nor opposition from religious leaders was able to stop the distribution of God's Word.
Jehovah has protected it through the ages. It's just as Psalm 12 and verse 6 and 7 says,
The sayings of Jehovah are pure. They're like silver refined in an earthen furnace, purified seven times.
You will guard them, O Jehovah. You will protect each one of them from this generation forever.
Yes, Jehovah has protected each one of his precious sayings down through the ages, but consider a third obstacle.
Although the Bible is now available in whole or in part in almost 3,000 languages, many people are no longer interested in reading it.
In our modern age, people have become increasingly skeptical and irreligious. Scientists have extolled the theory of evolution and have made it appear intelligent to doubt the existence of God.
At the same time, secular philosophy has encouraged people to make life decisions according to what feels right to them.
What is the result? A world where people are often guided by their own selfish, fleshly desires.
Instead of leading to happiness, many people are left feeling empty and dissatisfied.
How is this third obstacle overcome? Around the world, people are opening God's Word the Bible and reading it for themselves.
They are recognizing that its thoughts are not simply human wisdom. As they apply its principles in their lives, they find contentment and joy.
They develop self-respect and dignity from living according to the upright moral standards outlined by our Creator.
As Psalm 119 verses 97 to 100 state,
How I do love your law, I ponder over it all day long.
Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies because it is with me forever.
I have more insight than all my teachers because I ponder over your reminders.
I act with more understanding than older men because I observe your orders.
What a powerful proof that the Word of God endures forever.
While the advice of human philosophers is frequently flawed, the Bible's counsel works.
If we apply it, it can help us either to overcome or to cope with any problem or situation that we may face.
What is more, by explaining God's purpose for the future, it gives us a solid hope.
This earth will be restored to the paradise that it was when it was first created.
It will be filled with peace and righteousness.
A wonderful gift Jehovah gave us through the Bible.
Yes, language barriers, opposition from religious leaders,
and even an increasingly irreligious world cannot stop God's Word.
How can you be part of the evidence that the Word of God endures forever?
Read it every day.
Study it, meditate on the deep thoughts that it contains,
and then apply those priceless teachings in your life.
In this way, not just on the printed page, not just on the library shelf,
but in our minds, in our own hearts, in our own lives,
the Word of God will truly endure forever.
Now, let's get better acquainted with one of the individuals we just mentioned who truly loved God's Word.
In the 16th century, English scholar William Tindale had to endure harsh persecution in order to translate the Bible,
but he was convinced that the Bible had to be translated.
You'll notice that this brief documentary has been designed also to appeal to people who are not Jehovah's Witnesses,
as it will later be made available on our official website, jw.org.
In the autumn of 1536, William Tindale was led from his prison cell in the castle of Elvord
to the site of his impending execution.
There a post had been prepared for him.
Tindale was chained to the post, strangled to death,
and then his body burned before the on-looking crowed.
His crime?
Tindale struggled to reconcile the teachings of the church with his own studies of the Bible.
William Tindale died with his faith intact that the Bible is the Word of God.
William Tindale was the first person to seek to translate the Bible from the original languages into English.
Tindale was born in the late 15th century.
He was born in the area of Gloucestershire,
but had the chance to go to Oxford and became a priest.
In the 15th century, there was a lot of resistance,
the idea that the Word of God could just simply be accessible by the general people.
People knew the Latin Bible from church, which was interpreted by the priest, for them.
They never had direct access to the Bible themselves.
Tindale was not allowed to do this translation in England.
He went to the Bishop of London, asking for his permission to translate the New Testament
from the Greek, the original text, into English,
but it was not given that permission.
Such was the opposition to Bible translation.
The Tindale later wrote, there was no place to do it in all England.
And so with the help of merchants sympathetic to his cause,
Tindale fled to Germany, where he could more easily work on his English translation of the New Testament.
By 1525, his translation was complete and ready to be printed.
The British Library in London holds the answer to what happened next.
Dr. Karin Limper Hertz, a lead curator at the library, is going to help us find out.
So we're looking at a unique copy of the first edition of Tindale's New Testament,
printed in Cologne in 1525.
The Cologne fragment is the only known copy of what exists of Tindale's first edition of the New Testament.
The fact that it is a fragment shows that it was a dangerous thing to do.
The printer had too much to drink and mentioned that he was printing this pro-Lutheran English New Testament
for somebody called William Tindale.
The authoritist found out about it and the printer was raided.
Tindale aunties, partners ran, and this is all that survives today.
And they went down the Rhine a bit further to Worms.
So the fact they didn't get much further than partway through Matthew
is quite indicative of how dangerous it was.
The first complete copies of Tindale's translation of the Christian Greek scriptures
were finally printed in the city of Worms in Germany in 1526.
Around 3,000 or more of these books were produced.
After leaving Germany, Tindale moved to Antwerp.
This bustling city was ideal for Tindale.
It had a thriving printing industry and its busy port made it easy for his books to reach readers in England.
Professor Guido Latry has kindly offered to show me around the very streets Tindale would have walked himself
some 500 years ago.
What he saw around him here was ordinary people having access to the Bible in Dutch.
He wanted the same for his own folk in England.
If he wanted to smuggle Bibles on a large scale into England,
this was Northern Europe's biggest seaport.
You can't easily smuggle a big volume and a big format.
So tiny loose leaves that were taken to places like this,
these underground settlers, the warehouses,
and between the leaves of larger books that were not forbidden,
the tiny leaves of Tindale's translation would have been hidden.
In London, someone would have recognized,
aha, these are the stacks at our mark.
I must have a look at these and find the loose leaves of Tindale's Bible.
There were about 30,000 copies of Tindale's Bible available by the end of his life.
This was a brave man and a big man in terms of courage,
and in terms of investment of time,
and the risk he took are not to be underestimated.
William Tindale was imprisoned here in Volvod just north of Brussels.
As he languished in prison for over a year,
he no doubt contemplated the cruel death inevitably awaited him.
Tindale is often renowned for his influence on the English language,
but his work was more than that of just scholarly ambition.
Tindale loved the Bible.
Maybe it can be said of him that he shared the feelings of the Samist,
who spoke of God's word and said,
how I do love your law.
Despite intense opposition,
the Bible and the wisdom in it survives to this day,
a faithful transmission of the original rights as words.
No wonder so many have placed such value on the Bible.
You'll be happy to know that later this month
an extended version of this documentary will be made available.
It contains additional examples of individuals
who risked their lives to spread God's word.
The video is called, they valued the Bible,
and will be released on video on demand under the heading, the Bible.
Knowing that Jehovah is personally involved in preserving
and making known his word,
we can be confident that the Bible is the only true means of drawing close to him.
As a child, David Sibri from England had not read the Bible.
Instead, he had been taught traditions of men.
What helped him see the truth?
I was born in 1930.
We lived in Little Hampton,
which was a seaside town,
very pleasant little place, quiet place.
I would like to walk in the countryside,
they should intrigue me.
My interest was in what I saw rather than what I read.
Well, 1939, war broke out,
and our road became the second line of defense.
And then, of course, you get the aircraft.
Well, there was a young boy, young them myself,
and one Sunday morning, an air raid took place,
and the house where he was living was destroyed, and he was killed.
But I remember saying to my mother,
why did he have to die?
And her answer was, well, he's in a better place.
He's with God in heaven.
We didn't quite add up to me.
I couldn't understand how God could be responsible for his death,
which meant he was responsible for war.
So it was a whole thing was depressing, perhaps, but it that way.
As far as religion was concerned,
I accepted it was there,
but I couldn't understand how he fitted him or what was going on.
There was a gap somewhere,
and I couldn't plug it.
Every time you went to church, you had a hymn book, and a prayer book.
But a Bible was something you had personally,
and the only time I ever opened it,
was when I began to study with Jehovah's Witnesses.
I was 17, 18 years of age when I started.
A brother named Joe Gladwin called upon me.
I knew nothing about the Bible.
The fact that he said it very enough,
he said it was Bible, okay.
But what do other people say?
I decided to look for myself.
I realized that what Joe was telling me was right.
But he showed me that the Bible was true.
I began to see that the Bible told me things that I'd never known.
Over the years, I've been privileged to collect so many different translations of the Bible.
Reading through the different translations,
it's clear that God's Word never changes.
I got baptized at the age of 20 and 1950.
Over the years, I served first of all as a pioneer.
From then, I came to Bethel, moving from Bethel
to the circuit and district work,
and then finally, coming back to Bethel for the writing desk.
The assignments I've had have strengthened my conviction,
not only that Jehovah is giving direction,
and His Spirit can enable us to do whatever He wants us to do,
but the organization has grown,
and with the development of the governing body's direction,
is an organization which is second to none,
and therefore staying with it is the logical thing to do.
In my life, I looked in many places
for answers to life's questions,
but only the Bible has provided answers.
I am so thankful that Jehovah continues to teach us.
Brother Sibri's appreciation for the Bible is heartwarming.
Do you remember how we can personally demonstrate our appreciation
for the Word of God by reading, studying,
and meditating on the deep thoughts that it contains,
and then by applying those inspired teachings in our lives?
When we do that, we allow the Holy Spirit
to affect our inner being,
to shape our desires and objectives in life.
However, what if someone has harbored resentment
against his fellow man for years,
perhaps to the point of wanting to kill that person?
What can God's Word do in such a serious circumstance?
Remember the words of Hebrews chapter 4 and verse 12,
for the Word of God is alive and exerts power
and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.
Yes, Jehovah has preserved the Bible
so that we can benefit from the power of his Word.
Vladimir Olkov and Valeriy Zaporosky,
who are from Russia,
were the fiercest of enemies,
yet they experienced that power firsthand.
I was the ringleader of a criminal gang.
We extorted money, put people out of business,
threatened them, dragged them away.
And they would handle for everything.
People were afraid of me, and I liked it that way.
I never forgave anybody.
If someone wronged me,
I would say,
throw one stone at me,
I'll bury you in a mountain of rocks.
In 1993, I was working for the police.
They assigned me to gather information about a gang
whose leader was Vladimir Olkov.
One time when committing a crime,
they caught me at the scene.
I swore revenge on everybody involved with my arrest.
During interrogations, I did everything to humiliate Vladimir
and tried to break him up.
He just hated each other.
I told Valeriy, just remember.
Sooner or later, I'm getting out of prison.
And then, you're a dead man.
I thought to myself,
for a start,
I'm going to blow up his car.
If he doesn't understand,
then I'll just eliminate him.
His threats sounded so serious that I started to fear for my life.
I decided to have my friends and acquaintances
make his life behind bars unbearable,
and to make sure that he would never get out.
I saw that one of my cellmates had a pocket in New Testament.
I asked him if I could read it.
Seeing my interest in spiritual things,
someone gave me a watchtower magazine.
When I started reading the magazine,
I realized that there are other people out there, real people.
There's a totally different way of life to be had,
even now, and with such prospects.
I was just stunned.
Then I found another five magazines around the prison.
I devoured them as well,
and I became thoroughly convinced that I had found the truth.
When my wife was first allowed to visit me,
I told her right away,
I found the truth.
My wife made pretty fast progress
and was baptized two years later.
Her support was invaluable.
She would visit me,
constantly encouraging me to be faithful
and remain loyal to God.
In 1993, Jehovah's Witnesses visited me.
I agreed to a Bible study,
but the truth didn't touch my heart.
One time, Jehovah's Witnesses invited me to a gathering,
and there they told me that Vladimir Alkhov,
that criminal was about to get baptized
and become one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
I was cut to the heart.
When I got home, I burst into tears.
I realized that I had to make spiritual progress,
because if he and his circumstances could do it,
then I could do it.
That very moment I prayed for the first time in my life.
I was released in October of 1997.
After I was released,
the brothers organized a gathering.
They invited me to this gathering.
I remember that as I was approaching the place,
I suddenly realized this is where I once conducted a search.
And then, Valeri walks into the room.
We just hugged each other and burst into tears.
And I saw in his eyes a completely different look,
not like before.
It was a kind look.
It brought tears to my eyes.
It was like a big weight.
It was lifted from my chest.
My brother, we begged one another for forgiveness.
On the 23rd of November, 1997,
I was baptized together in the same pool
as my new friend, Valeri.
We really became the best of friends.
And now we serve as elders in the same congregation.
My wife and I often talk about what would have happened to us
if we had not started to study the Bible.
Probably, we wouldn't even be alive by now.
We've kept our family together,
even better, we now have a spiritual family
in the Christian congregation.
And my former enemy is now my brother and best friend.
More importantly, we've developed a close relationship with Jehovah.
Only God is able to change the thinking of such bitter enemies
as Velad and I were.
And I eagerly look forward to the day
when everything that divides people will be gone forever.
Do you see one reason why Jehovah did not allow his word
to be obliterated?
He knew the benefits you and I would reap
from having access to the Bible.
Its message is so powerful.
It could help Vladimir and Valeri to change their lives
and even become close friends.
While very few of us have taken part in the translation of the Bible,
all of us can share it with our neighbors
and help them to gain accurate knowledge of Jehovah.
In the following dramatization,
note some of the theocratic activities that this family enjoys
and what they had to do to become so zealous.
Okay, we already know how this story is going to end.
No real surprise is there.
So the real question is, how did we get here?
For the record, I never thought our ministry really needed help.
My wife and daughter were both regular pioneers.
My son was a solid publisher.
And while my schedule didn't let me pioneer yet,
I was trying to do all I could to support them.
I always assumed that this support I could provide
was just being out with them as much as possible.
But I quickly realized more was needed.
Our field service group overseer had been making a real effort
to work in the ministry with us regularly the last few weeks.
And he kindly mentioned he'd noticed a few challenges.
While our service time was great,
he pointed out that our return visits were slowly dwindling.
And other than the studies I had with the children,
no one in the family was conducting a Bible study.
I asked him what we could do to try and improve the quality of our ministry.
He showed me Romans 15, 19 highlighting Paul's words.
I have thoroughly preached the good news about the Christ.
He suggested on our next family worship night,
the King Paul's ministry and seeing what we could learn from his example.
As we looked at Paul's ministry,
we realized to be more productive we needed boldness.
Ephesians 6.19 says,
pray also for me that the words may be given to me when I open my mouth
so that I may be able to speak boldly
in making known the sacred secret of the good news.
Rina also noticed how Paul reasoned persuasively with people.
And Keiko liked how he found common ground with those he talked to.
Even referring to a pagan altar to an unknown God
as a way to direct the conversation to Jehovah.
Finally, Haruto noted how second Timothy said,
Paul was a workman with nothing to be ashamed of,
handling the word of the truth or right.
So he was skilled in using the scriptures with those he witnessed too.
See, I told you,
you already knew how this was going to end.
I started auxiliary pioneering.
We now have a number of return visits
and a few progressive Bible studies.
But how did we get here?
We learned from the example of Paul
and how he thoroughly preached the good news.
The group overseer could have simply listed what changes were needed
to improve the family's ministry.
Instead, he directed the father to a specific principle found in the scriptures.
After all, it is only God's word that is inspired for teaching.
Bible translations in common languages
started to spread across Europe in the 1500s.
But it took much longer for more remote places
to receive the Bible.
It was in 1766 that the complete Greek scriptures
or New Testament was first published in Greenlandic,
a language spoken today by about 50,000 people.
In August of last year,
I had the privilege of serving a regional convention in Greenland,
which is overseen by the Scandinavia branch.
Greenland is the neighbor to the north of Newfoundland,
where I pioneered for 11 years.
So it was a wonderful experience to go there and meet our brothers.
Some 400 brothers and sisters traveled at their own expense
from all over Scandinavia to support the convention in Greenland.
Although Greenland is a land covered by large ice caps,
there are many warm hearts yearning for the truth.
I think that Jesus had Greenland in mind when he spoke about preaching
to the most distant part of the earth.
My name is Arna Matson.
My wife Karen and I have lived in Greenland for more than 34 years.
We have traveled all over the country preaching about God's kingdom
and we have had some fantastic experiences.
In the 1950s, two young special pioneers came to Greenland as the first publishers.
They traveled by boat from town to town,
carrying just tents and simple equipment.
They had to endure the cold weather, face resistance from the local ministers,
and even fight with sledge dogs that took their food.
But they laid the groundwork for the great effort that has been made to preach to all in this country.
In the 1960s and 70s, many families moved here from Denmark to help with the preaching work.
I remember how I as a teenager in 1971 moved from Denmark to Greenland with my family.
It was not easy to learn the language,
but the brothers and sisters from Denmark did their best and it had a good effect on the territory.
In 1973, the watchtower began to be published in Greenlandic.
Just to pronounce the name,
Nabazoliak, Alabama, Suifik, was a challenge.
But it has been a popular magazine in Greenland ever since.
Once we met a couple who for many years had received copies of the watchtower
when publishers visited their settlement.
They told us that they often felt depressed when they woke up in the morning.
But when they read the magazine, they felt better, and they would read the same copies over and over again.
When the temperature drops and there's no falls,
the landscape gets covered by a beautiful white blanket for half a year.
So the publishers make good use of the summer.
Some towns and settlements only seldom receive a witness.
There are no roads between the towns, but we reach isolated areas by boats.
When someone shows interest in our message, the contact is maintained by phone.
Many have great respect for the Bible,
and so my book of Bible stories has found its way into many, many homes.
Over a period of 24 years,
Karen and I have sailed so much that it equals a trip twice around the globe.
This has caused a lot of effort and money,
but with Jehovah's blessing,
we have been able to continue year after year
preaching to the distant parts of Greenland.
The preaching work here is a great experience.
People are attentive and kind,
but it took a long time before the first native Greenlander was baptized,
actually 18 years of zealous preaching.
Today there are more than 150 publishers in five congregations.
Jehovah has really blessed the work that has been done here for more than 60 years.
In August 2016,
a very special convention was held in the capital of Munich.
Brothers and sisters from all over Scandinavia
traveled all the way to attend the convention.
We were very encouraged by the visit of a member of the governing body, Brother Mark Sanderson,
who gave us some faith-strengthening talks.
I think it's a great privilege to be able to understand the truth.
It's amazing that Jehovah gave his attention to an insignificant human like me.
When I started to follow the Bible's unique teachings and principles,
I clearly understood how it would benefit my own life.
After this convention, even though we live in small towns far away from the rest of the world,
we feel closer than ever before to the worldwide Brotherhood.
The peak attendance at the convention was 614, the largest ever in Greenland.
Our brothers from other parts of Scandinavia who attended the convention
also took part in a campaign inviting interested ones.
In only two hours, the whole capital city of Nook was covered.
It was a wonderful witness.
And speaking of witnessing in the most distant part of the earth,
you'll be happy to know that Brother Jeffrey Jackson of the governing body
recently explained in a morning worship
how the Bible was translated into numerous languages in the 19th century.
That segment is now available on Video On Demand.
It is entitled Reaching the Most Distant Part.
And later this month, a beautiful segment from the 2011 annual meeting
will be posted for your enjoyment.
It is an interview with five widows of governing body members.
The sisters relate how they learn the truth
and share treasured memories from their many years of faithful service.
This segment is entitled Interview with Faithful Sisters,
widows of governing body members, and will be available on Video On Demand
under the Interviews and Experiences category.
Do you agree that Jehovah gave us an outstanding gift in his word?
He not only gave us the gift, but also made sure time and time again
that it was preserved for our benefit.
Individuals we met earlier in the program,
such as Brothers David Sibri, Vladimir Olkov,
and Valeri Zaporosky have all seen the effects of the power
that God's word exerts, and the guidance it provides.
We also saw that the Bible is beneficial for teaching
and for setting things straight as we watch the family learn how to improve
their ministry by following the example of the Apostle Paul.
Yes, God's word has endured and will continue to endure forever.
As you know, on April 3, 2017, our museums in Warwick will open to the public.
In addition to our enlarged gallery entitled The Bible and the Divine Name,
we will also have a new gallery on the theme,
The Word of God endures forever.
Please come and visit.
You'll be happy to see a wonderful collection of Bibles
that illustrates the points we have discussed in this broadcast.
The psalmist was inspired to write,
how I do love your law,
and we agree we love Jehovah and we love the Bible.
And so have millions throughout the centuries,
including those who were used by Jehovah to preserve his word.
With these thoughts in mind,
let's enjoy this month's music video entitled Your Word endures forever.
Looked up at the start,
godly fear in their heart,
they thank their God up above,
for revealing to them his love.
So you gave them your name,
kingdom hoped to proclaim,
a word preserved for our day,
their faithful words to show us the way.
They loved you from there,
that just wants a key.
A beautiful song indeed.
We would like to conclude this program
by sharing these greetings from our brothers and sisters in Mali.
Mali is located in Western Africa,
reaching well into the Sahara Desert.
The northern part of the country is hot and covered with sand,
but the southern region,
which is watered by the Niger River,
is green with forests and vegetation.
The witnesses in the country have a huge task,
as the ratio of Jehovah's Witnesses to population
is about one publisher to 59,000 residents.
Also, the distances are tremendous.
The approximately 300 publishers cover an area
more than twice the size of the country of France.
Mali is one of the hottest countries in the world,
so some groups and congregations hold their meetings outdoors,
under the cool shade of a tree.
Although the official language of the country is French,
most people better understand the local language, Bambara.
Thus, most meetings are either held or interpreted in Bambara.
Recently, language classes were held in Beaumont,
which is another local language.
Also, the seven publishers of the American Sign Language Week
have been assigned to witness to the more than 350,000 people
in Mali who have a hearing impairment.
Last year, the total attendance for the memorial
was over 1,100 people.
One man who received an invitation walked three kilometers,
or almost two miles to attend the memorial,
despite having a physical challenge with his foot.
He is now regular at the meetings
and is making good progress.
Recently, a new kingdom hall was built in the capital city.
Municipal and state authorities, neighbors and many passers-by
have been amazed at what they have seen,
and they have praised the brothers working on the project.
Our brothers and sisters in Mali send us their love.
We love them, and we love all of you.
This is JW Broadcasting from the World Headquarters
of Jehovah's Witnesses.